Grabbing elements on a page and “traversing” the DOM (moving around from one element to another) are two cornerstones of any web page scripting. Although the grabbing part is finally being addressed properly in latest crop of browsers—it took more than a decade, though!—DOM walking without libraries remains an incredible mess. That’s why we all use one library or another, either consistently or on a per-project basis.
There are only a few points I’d like to touch on here.
First, be warned that all code relying on document.getElementById falls victim to IE’s unbelievable quirk. It will look into any and all name= attributes, too. Now, if you work with strict DOCTYPEs (which you should!), this seems to only mean “Beware of field names!” That’s because you unconsciously rule out the <head> and its <meta> tag’s name= attribute. So, what happens when you unwittingly define an element with an id= of description or keywords and you try to grab it? You get the <meta> element instead of your intended target! So, just avoid these id= values.
On the facing page, I mention that most techniques for selecting elements let you specify a context node or root node, which acts as a root element within which to perform the selection. By default, that context is the whole document. If you look at API docs for utilities such as $$( ), query( ), jQuery’s all-purpose $( ), and the like, you’ll always find an optional argument (usually the second one) that lets you pass your context element. Remember that the narrower the search, the faster the selection!
Finally, the bare-bones DOM API is not well suited to common moving-around use cases, because it works with nodes, not elements. You get bogged down in whitespace, comments, text nodes, and so on. This is why most libraries provide nifty, element-oriented helpers. Prototype, jQuery, and MooTools provide a rich API, with previous( ) (or prev( )), next( ), siblings( ), ancestors( ), and the like, or get-prefixed versions of these. The YUI 3 API is slightly less rich. Dojo and Ext JS seem to lack this sugar in their cores.:wq
